[MRG] polish text (#10)
dib-lab/2020-workflows-paper: content/05.project-management.md

## Workflow-Based Project Management

Computational project management is a learned skill that takes time to implement.

> Biological analyses often span hundreds of steps and involve a myriad of decisions ranging from small-scale tool and parameter choices to larger-scale decisions around computational experimental design and statistical analyses.

Reviewer: this is a nice motivational sentence... if not here, maybe intro or conclusion

Author: i agree! I think intro would be good

> The umbrella term project management refers to the strategies and decisions used to keep a project organized, documented, functional, and shareable. 

Reviewer: I think this section still needs some motivation re: why project management is important.

Reviewer: it's in there with "organized, documented, functional, and shareable", might just need a little better lead-in..

Fortunately, workflow systems both simplify and improve computational project management.

### Systematically document your workflows

Pervasive documentation facilitates transparency in computing and makes the goals and results of a workflow clear. 
This increases reusability of a workflow and provides context for biological insights derived from an analysis.

> To acheive this purpose, documentation is necessary for all parts of a workflow and includes things like file names, folder organization, commented and clear code, and accompanying explanatory documents. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve this purpose, documentation is necessary for all parts of a workflow and includes things like file names, folder organization, commented and clear code, and accompanying explanatory documents. 
```

While good documentation can be generated by the user alone, workflow systems are self-documenting to a degree, with each analysis step (and parameters) and the links between those steps completely specified. 

> The simplest way to document your workflow, then, is to include as much of it as possible within the automated workflow framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplest way to document your code, then, is to include as much of it as possible within the automated workflow framework.
```

> While this may document code and parameters, other parts of the workflow like data analysis decisions and file organization need to be documented in other ways, for which we discuss workflow-compatible strategies below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For other parts of the workflow, including data analysis decisions and file organization, we discuss workflow-compatible strategies below.
```

#### Use consistent, self-documenting names

Using consistent and descriptive identifiers for your files, scripts, variables, workflows, projects, and even manuscripts helps keep your projects organized and interpretable for yourself and collaborators.
For workflow systems, this strategy can be implemented by tagging output files with a descriptive identifier for each analysis step, either in the filename or by placing output files within a descriptive output folder.
For example, the file shown in **Figure {@fig:filenaming}** has been preprocessed with a quality control trimming step.
For large workflows, placing results from each step of your analysis in isolated, descriptive folders can be essential for keeping your project workspace clean and organized.

> ![Consistent and informative file naming improves organization and interpretability. It is useful to keep unique sample identification in the filename, often with a metadata file explaining the meaning of each unique descriptor. For analysis scripts, it can help to implement a numbering scheme, where the name of first file in the analysis begins with "00", the next with "01", etc. For output files, it can help to add a short, unique identifier to output files processed with each analysis step. This particular file is a RADsequencing fastq file of a fish species that has been preprocessed with a fastq quality trimming tool (courtesy of Shannon Joslin).](images/filenaming.svg){#fig:filenaming}

Reviewer: nice

If a key piece of a workflow inexplicably stops working, good version control can allow you to rewind in time and identify differences from when the pipeline worked to when it stopped working.

![**Version Control** Version control systems (e.g. Git, Mercurial) work by storing incremental differences in files from one saved version ("commit") to the next. To visualize the differences between each version, text editors such as Atom and online services such as GitHub, GitLab and Bitbucket use red highlight to denote deletions, and green highlighting to denote additions. In this trivial example, a typo in version 1 (in red) was corrected (green). These systems are extremely useful for code and manuscript development, as it is possible to return to the snapshot of any saved version. This means that version control systems save you from accidental deletions, preserve code you thought you no longer needed, and preserve a record of project changes over time.](images/version_control.svg){#fig:version_control}

Version control systems also facilitate code and data availability and reproducibility for publication.

> For example, to preserve the version of code that produced published results, you can create a "release", a snapshot of the current code and files in a GitHub repository.

Reviewer: ooh, yes

Shiny allows you to build interactive web pages using R code.
Data is manipulated  by R code in real-time in a web page, producing analysis and visualizations of a data set.
Shiny apps can contain user-specifiable parameters, allowing a user to control visualizations or analyses. As seen above, sample "PT1" is selected, and taxonomic ranks class and order are excluded.

> Shiny apps allow collaborators who may or may not know R to change R visualisations to fit their interests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shiny apps allow collaborators who may or may not know R to modify R visualizations to fit their interests.
```

In our experience, the best way to have your workflow system work _for_ you is to include as much of your analysis as possible within the automated workflow framework, use self-documenting names, include analysis visualizations, and keep rigorous documentation alongside your workflow that enables you to understand each decision and entirely reproduce any manual steps. 
Some of the tools discussed above will inevitably change over time, but these principles apply broadly and will help you design clear, well-documented, and reproducible analyses. 
Ultimately, you'll need to experiment with strategies that work for you -- what is most important is to develop a clear set of strategies and implement them tenaciously. 

> Below we provide a few practical strategies to try as you begin developing your own workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below, we provide a few practical strategies to try as you begin developing your own workflows.
```

**Start with working code**

> Starting workflow development with functioning code provides a reliable workflow framework free of syntax errors, allowing the user to customize and tailor the workflow to their data while minimizing cognitive load.

Reviewer: nice

> Starting workflow development with functioning code provides a reliable workflow framework free of syntax errors, allowing the user to customize and tailor the workflow to their data without while minimizing cognitive load.

Author: ```suggestion
Starting workflow development with functioning code provides a reliable workflow framework free of syntax errors, allowing the user to customize and tailor the workflow to their data while minimizing cognitive load.
```

Workflow tutorials and code sharing websites like GitHub, GitLab, and Bitbucket have many publicly available workflows.
If a workflow is available through Binder, you can test and experiment with workflow modification on Binder's cloud system without needing to install a workflow manager or software management tool [@doi:10.25080/Majora-4af1f417-011].
When building a workflow for the first time, selecting an example workflow with sample data can help verify the analysis works.
**Table @tbl:workflows** provides links to official repositories containing tutorials and example biological analysis workflows.

**Test with subsampled data**

> While a workflow may run on test data, this is not a gauruntee it will run on all data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While a workflow may run on test data, this is not a guarantee it will run on all data.
```
